Alex, welcome to Talk Bythinomy.
Well, thanks for having me.
This is Comfy Surroundings.
Hello.
Hello, hello.
Yes, I'm really excited to be talking about self-hosting, something I have talked around on the podcast a little bit, and I had the Home Assistant guys on for a while long ago when Home Assistant was this little boutique thing
that people might find interesting.
Now it's kind of blown up, But I'm really looking forward to talking about digital sovereignty, running your own apps, not being dependent on huge tech companies
for every little thing, and just the joy of finding something in open source or just out there and going, hey, what if I just run that myself?
And so I thought of Alex, I thought of you, and I said, hey, we got to talk about this.
ALEX SMYTH: Great, yeah.
Well, thanks for having me.
ALEX SMYTH: Yeah, you bet.
So before we dive into all those things, give people a bit of a background about yourself.
Yeah, well, I'm Alex.
I, as you perhaps can tell from the accent, originally hail from the UK.
I live in North Carolina these days, though, for my sins.
And I work for Tailscale.
I head up their DevRel department and primarily make YouTube videos for them.
You know, it's an interesting company to work for because it's all product-led growth.
So my job is to really get people enthused and excited about the product and all the interesting ways in which they can access their stuff remotely.
And then, I don't know, people bring it to work and that's how the company makes money.
So I get paid essentially to make YouTube videos about hacking on self-hosted applications.
And I still don't quite know how that happened.
You know, I think you guys over at Tailscale are doing a great job.
We're going to go into it later when we get into sort of the security and accessing stuff of all the self-hosting things.
But I started using Tailscale a couple of years ago, and yeah, it's fabulous.
So very nicely done.
Yeah.
So some other stuff I've done, I used to do a podcast called Self-Hosted.
Wrapped that up last year.
But I do a new one now called Bitflip with a few of my buddies.
But again, from the self-hosting universe, you can find out more about that at bitflip.show.
I hope some self-promotion's okay.
Please, yes.
No, that sounds good.
Because I was a little disappointed to hear that you shut down the self-hosted podcast because I was just getting into it.
Yeah, we did it.
How does it differ?
Well, not much, really.
The weird thing was about self-hosted, and I don't know if you felt this with a show with Python in the name, but I kind of felt a little bit limited by the title.
because I tend to approach things from a very pragmatic angle.
We were just talking before we pressed record about how important Linux and open source and all this kind of stuff is, and yet I'm using a MacBook to record, not Linux, because it's just bulletproof reliable for media applications.
And there are all these little compromises we make all throughout our digital lives.
And so self-hosted as a movement, particularly on the subreddit actually, It's very opinionated.
And unless you're doing absolutely everything, lock stock 100% yourself, there are some people who say, well, you're holding it wrong.
You're not doing it properly.
My approach has always been, it's okay to have DigitalOcean run a VPS for me, but I've still got route to that VPS and I am hosting my own website.
So I'm self-hosting my own websites.
But to some people, that definition doesn't sit right.
And so you got to be running on a Raspberry Pi in your basement if that's not the way it is it's not true right and we all know that that there are
just limitations to doing like maybe you're moving house and so your website would be offline for two weeks whilst you move house that's probably not okay uh or there's a storm in your area or a water
pipe burst so like any number of fates can befall things in your house i'm not saying these things can't happen to a data center but there are just mitigations in place between you know even just
things like isp peering like the data center is probably in the middle of a an internet exchange building whereas my house definitely is not so um kind of wrapped up the self-hosted podcast just a
little bit because i felt like i don't don't think i feel this way anymore but sort of 18 months ago when we wrapped it up uh that self-hosting had we kind of said all we needed to say and that as a
movement it would it was just kind of bubbling away in the background and those that had found it were going to find it and it was just sort of ticking over but i don't know self-hosting's all the line
trendy these days i think i heard linus on the wan show on friday literally saying that building a naz is trendy and i'm like what really is it okay cool i'm here for it
yeah i'm i'm here for it as well and i'm glad to hear you're still carrying on with the podcast
under a different banner well the reality is that a lot of this stuff like i said like i do for tail scale and for bitflip now is this is stuff i'm doing anyway like my personal youtube channel
as well at um ktz systems like i just i'm just always like just out of shot over here there is a desk covered with like five of those little lenovo mini pcs that i'm putting into a little
proxmox seph cluster because i woke up last week and my home assistant was down because my little Minis Forum MS01 had lit itself on fire in the middle of the night, and I found, ah, there's a single point of failure.
I can fix that with some clustering and high availability, and so the rabbit hole continues.
Yes, I love that you have high availability on your home network.
I'm working on it, which is another story.
So it turns out these little Lenovo PCs, you can pick them up for about $150 or so, even today, even in the hardware apocalypse that we're going through.
these you know the ones i mean like the little one liter pcs right usually bolted onto the back of a monitor in an office or something right and you can pick those up for about 150 and they will run
every self-hosted app you could possibly throw at them in reality certainly just for individual use they are absolutely all the average person needs as a home server and so one of the things i like
to do with them is put what's called proxmox on it which is a hypervisor that lets you run virtual machines, something called LXCs, Linux containers, as well as Docker. We love me. We love us some
Docker, I understand. If basically, if it doesn't run in Docker, I don't, I don't run it. I'm just
going to trigger some people in the audience, I'm sure. You know what? I'm with you. When I go and look at one of these things that is potentially self-hosted, I'm like, well, where's the Docker compose file? Otherwise, I'm not sure we're going to be continuing down this path. I mean, you Python
and people know all about standardized packaging formats and stuff like that like the prevalence of pip and then on these days uv of course like you know these things matter like how users round
off those rough edges of how it gets from my keyboard in my lab to your computer and wherever you are docker kind of closed that last 10 i mean a lot of the primitives of docker existed well
before like c groups and namespaces in the Linux kernel all that stuff existed for years before docker came along all they did really was provide a standardized packaging format which is really
just a tarball and a standard way of building those tarballs with a docker file like a recipe that was all they did and provided a little bit of plumbing and networking like we just ignore all
the technical details they did but essentially they just closed that last 10 of usability and suddenly me as a computer science student could run any application in the world without having
to dive into system d and init scripts and database migrations and it was just complex networking
attached volumes like there's a lot of stuff going on there yeah yeah docker is life in this house
um long time ago now i co-founded a website called Linuxserver.io i don't know if anybody in the audience has heard that but it's the largest i believe uh sort of open source containerization
movement project on the internet and that was born out of the fact that sort of 10 gosh yeah maybe 12 years ago that uh docker was pre 1.0 so it was very sort of nascent at that point and it was
there was just there were no standards like the readmes were all over the place or if there even was one there were no sort of standardized base images people hadn't cottoned on to like supply
chains and you know like today it's a hot topic but sort of back then it was oh if if it runs i'm happy you know exactly what could go wrong so Linux server was sort of my attempt our attempt i should
say uh fixing uh fixing some of those issues and uh you know we packaged up media server apps back back in the day, like Plex and some of the other slightly less salubrious applications
you might find on the internet, as well as a bunch of other self-hosting stuff, which we should probably get into talking about some of the apps.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, to kind of put a bookend on your introduction, I do just want to quickly ask you about your racing and VIR and stuff like that.
You know, when I was looking to contact you, I was going through your about page and I saw a car racing around a racetrack.
And I will can't not talk about that.
I've had folks from Formula One and from NASCAR on the show before.
And I'm a big fan of these kinds of things.
Yeah, I do, too.
So that's one of your hobbies.
That's pretty awesome.
Yeah, I've followed Formula One since I remember sitting on my dad's knee as a kid watching Damon Hill, Nigel Mansell go around Silverstone.
so it's been a while.
There's obviously a new crop of F1 fans, which is amazing, thanks to the Drive to Survive stuff.
But I've followed it for years.
I just enjoy watching the sport.
It's like a nerd soap opera in a way.
Not a fan, honestly, of these new regs, though, with the super clipping and all this kind of stuff.
It'd be interesting to see what happens
when we get to where's the next one miami i think yeah i believe it is miami and then canada so for people who don't know out there formula one is called formula one because there's one formula
on how to build the cars but then all the teams generally almost from scratch build their cars and every couple every four four or five years they're like okay we're completely doing it differently and so this year they've completely done it differently and there's a lot of
controversy I don't know it's it's interesting but yeah they've gone for like this 50 50 split between the combustion engine and the battery power but the batteries can't harvest enough
energy every lap so I don't know what genius thought of that but uh so they get halfway around the half around the lap and they lose half of their horsepower which can mean you've got closing
speeds between cars of sort of I don't know 50 to 100 miles per hour and we saw in Japan in the last race uh quite a bad accident as a consequence yeah um yeah right there in spoon it wasn't pretty
um i i know all the electric stuff in like the hybrid things in indycar and even way way more so in formula one is for environmental friendliness and hey i drive an electric car i love electric
cars and i'm all about caring about the environment and stuff but the 20 cars driving around the track is nothing compared to the 300 000 people that took airplanes
to get there and then when they ship the cars on planes halfway around the world like yeah the fuel spent when they're racing it has nothing to do with you know it doesn't even register on the number of the environmental impact of that so i don't know i kind of long
for the damon hill days with like oh me too fast engines you know on our honeymoon actually uh my wife and I we ended up in Milan on race weekend totally by accident genuinely by accident we were
booking this like interrail trip around Europe and we my itinerary landed us in Milan on race weekend I didn't actually know at the time and all hotels for that weekend spiked they're like
two or three exiting costs and I'm like what's going on so I just typed Milan events September whatever anyway turns out so we went to Monza and I'll never forget we were stood at it was the
iscari chicane so it's on the opposite side from the start finish straight and the noise i think there were v8s i don't think there were v10s i think there were v8s then but just the noise of
them sitting on the grid waiting to go it was like a bunch of angry wasps and you could hear it and it's you know it's a half a mile away yeah amazing amazing we lost something when they went to the v6
turbo hybrid stuff 100 all right last bit i mean a lot of people are fans of f1 and racing not many
of them end up on a race track oh yeah yeah that's a whole different how do you get this yeah so i've been into i've i've owned seven volkswagen golfs over the years
uh culminating in the golf r a few years ago and i just i just had to take it on a track like in england i went on this run what we call it a run what you brung track evening and i went to
brand's hatch and i literally turned up without even a helmet without doing any prep or whatever and they just let me on track just i couldn't believe it um and then i um had the best evening
of my life and then we emigrated and came here and i was like i gotta scratch that itch so i went to um the internet and found out to go to vair you have to do all sorts of training and get like
instructors and it all sounded sounded a bit much but anyway vair is a serious racetrack like you could end up i think on the back straight in my little golf i was doing 140 on the back straight
and there are moments coming up through the uphill essays at VIR where you're just like, if this goes wrong, she's going to hurt.
And in the end, I ended up scaring myself a bit silly, but I had real fun, but there was just a couple of moments where I was like, you know, I've got a kid at home.
I should probably.
This is a young man's game.
Or an old man's game when you've got nothing left to lose, I guess.
Yeah, that's true.
It's a bimodal sort of experience.
yeah um but i learned a lot like i learned how to change brake pads brake fluid uh i fitted a new intercooler to my car i upgraded the turbo i did tuning like technical stuff i like learning how
things work same with software same with cars it's basically just one is slightly more visceral and arguably the stakes are a bit higher if you screw up installing a turbo it can be very expensive
yeah yeah it's worse than oh i gotta reinstall that yeah yeah good fun though no i'm sure it's amazing that sounds very very cool so what a great experience let's talk the main main topic like i
guess we've been using the word without really defining it like what is self-hosting for people who are just like you know they they haven't done these sorts of things i i think as i as i alluded
to earlier there's a broad spectrum of definitions to what self-hosting means to different people depending on how tightly you hold certain beliefs around definitions but for me it means
the business model that exists is feeding the open source developer or small team that built it like it's it's not uh are you familiar with cory doctorow and his idea of n certification
the idea that a company will give something we've been accused of this at tailscale and i don't think it's actually going to happen um the ceo at tailscale i have great faith in in avery's
leadership honestly i know it's not like a corporate she'll say in that but i genuinely believe it so um the idea of entiatification is that a company takes a bunch of money from
venture capital or some other source uh and gives the product away we saw it with uber for example They give the product away at a loss-leading price point to gain market share.
We've seen it in multiple industries over the years.
Walmart is a great example.
They'll put mom and pop short, stores out of business in the local town, and then slowly raise the prices.
Right, right.
Once everyone's gone, they have no choice but to go there.
Exactly.
It's tough.
So the idea of digitification in software is very prevalent.
We're seeing it with streaming services right now, where they're just gradually turning the screw, lifting the prices, pulling out shows without your control.
All of these things have really boiled around one central point.
I mentioned the business model.
That's one thing.
But really, it's control.
And do you have control over the services that are running your life?
If you have Google in your life, you probably don't.
If you have Apple in your life, you probably don't.
You feel like you do, but there are countless examples.
For example, there was one a couple of years ago where, I think this was in the New York Times, we definitely covered this on Self-Hosted a while ago, where a mother took pictures of their kids, a medical issue of their kids, private areas, and sent it to their doctors through telehealth.
They also sent the picture to their husband through a messaging app, which then meant that that picture got backed up to, I think it was Google Photos.
It might have been Amazon.
Please don't quote me on this.
I'm just speaking from two-year-ago memory.
And they got flagged as a CSAM issue, like a child pornography issue.
And they had most of their digital life cancelled.
They were locked out of their accounts.
They were basically banned from that company.
Might have been Google.
Let's go with Google.
And just the idea of being locked out of my Gmail.
I mean, just stop and think about how much of your life is in your Gmail inbox.
How long have you had yours?
15 years.
I think there's over a quarter million emails in my Gmail account.
It's ridiculous.
It is ridiculous.
And extrapolate that from email to photos.
Extrapolate that to music, to videos, to, I don't know, tax season, invoices, all this stuff.
There are just so many different facets of our lives that we've given up to third parties that are either being used to train the next round of industrial revolution, oligarchy revolution, like AI models, or they're being used to feed an advertiser's bottom line and create a profile about you and who you are and what you do and who you associate with.
because make no mistake when your photo gets uploaded to google photos they are making a map of all the faces in that photo whether you know the person in the background or not google will
know them because they probably have google photos too yeah and they can scan that alex was stood next to fred smith on june the 21st 1983 and like they can create such incredibly detailed profiles about
people and if that doesn't bother you self-hosting is probably not for you but i don't know about i don't know about you but it makes me deeply uncomfortable that i'm giving up these freedoms
and these this privacy without really appreciating that i'm doing so like a lot of the transaction is very what's the word i'm looking for like it it's just not a fair it's not a fair exchange of value
It's asymmetric.
Yeah.
Very asymmetric.
Yeah, absolutely.
Totally.
And I want to just, while we're sort of setting the stage, I just want to put an idea out there that this kind of stuff is super valuable and a good thing to keep in mind, not just for individuals, which 100% that it is,
but also for developers running their software.
Do you necessarily need to take all of your data and put it into an AWS managed service or an Azure managed service or send all of your users information
through say Google Analytics to Google to then turn around a mine or to other places.
I feel like people think they have to.
You don't have to.
It almost feels inevitable, doesn't it, these days?
That, oh, well, everyone else is doing it.
I may as well.
Yeah.
We'll get the cookie banner.
We'll put it up.
People are used to everywhere they go, they click the cookie banner.
True.
But there are entirely serviceable alternatives to almost every single proprietary service that you have.
Google Analytics, let's start with that one.
There's an open source app called Plausible that does almost everything that Google Analytics does.
It just, the analytics stay within your world and they're not kind of fed into the Google machine.
And whether that's a, like on feature parity, there's an argument to be made there about like well google's more invasive so they have more data i don't see that as a plus point personally yeah i don't either and i think this is an interesting
segue to finding some of the interesting apps here so i went to pull up plausible.io and i think you're right i think plausible is really great the one that i'm using is umami.is which is sort of a peer to plausible.
I believe, I think you can pay for both of them.
I'm not a hundred percent sure about Umami right now.
- Yeah, I don't know, you're absolutely doing some hard lifting over there
'cause plausible works just fine for me.
You're using Umami, are you?
- Yeah, I'm using Umami and I looked at plausible as well.
And Umami seemed a little more oriented towards self-hosting, whereas plausible self-hosting seemed like, oh, you could do it, but we're kind of this thing that we run in the cloud and you can pay for it.
But you technically could.
And I felt like Umami was self-hosting first.
Like I said, I'm pretty sure there is a you now can pay for it as well.
But I wanted to bring up this.
The site can't be reached because I think another interesting thing is hosting DNS.
So like PyHoles, I have nextdns.io, which is why I can't go to Plausible right now unless I log in and tell it plausible is okay.
Same thing for Umami, by the way.
I think, what about, let's talk, you're at Tailscale, let's talk networking.
We'll get back to the use of Tailscale when we kind of wrap things up, but like, do you use Pyhole or use any of these sort of managed things outside just your browser?
- Well, the modern internet basically requires
using an ad blocker.
I mean, when you, I'm fortunate to work from home.
So I'm almost always with inside these four walls where I have an AdGuard home instance running.
And my DHCP server, whenever a device requests an IP address from the router, it will hand out the DNS server in my local network as the AdGuard home instance.
And AdGuard home's job is to run a list of websites that it thinks are serving ads.
And it will block those at the DNS level.
So simply what will happen is you will go to try and load a website, and it can't load certain components of the web page, and those components happen to be adverts in this case.
It's not 100% coverage, but I'd say it's sort of in the 80% to 90% range, which is still a heck of a lot better than having no ad blocking whatsoever.
And the idea here is that a lot of these, well, first of all, adverts use a lot of bandwidth.
They also are probably shoving down a ton of JavaScript into your browser, so the performance of loading a web page is worse.
It's using more bandwidth.
It's using more processing power.
And on mobile, of course, that matters.
When I leave the house, I'm not under the umbrella of my AdGuard home instance anymore because it's running on, I don't know, a Raspberry Pi in my basement.
And so I've got a couple of options.
One is I can use a hosted DNS service like you do called NextDNS, which basically does the same thing as a Pi hole, except you pay for it.
I don't think it's a huge amount of money,
if I record it.
It's a couple of bucks.
It's either $1 or $1.99 a month.
It's really small, yeah.
It seems fair.
And the idea behind NextDNS, like I say, is that it does the same thing as a pie hole or an AdGuard home.
It's just a hosted service that you pay for, a managed service.
Or you can use something like TailScale and tunnel back through your firewall remotely and set your AdGuard home as your tail net DNS server and then use your AdGuard home or your pie hole from your basement that you're already running,
already configured with all of your ad lists and blah, blah, blah.
You can configure that to be your DNS server.
And my wife loves these sort of like mobile games, like the candy crushes of the world.
Yeah.
And they are just chocked full of ads.
And we only really talk about it when we're like traveling because she's, oh God, I wish we were at home because then I wouldn't get adverts.
yeah i'll just turn on tailscale and lo and behold yeah you're back to good i think one final little
note about like running your um either your ad guard at home or your next dns if you register at your router level that's really interesting is you block ads in mobile apps as well like you're
mentioning or on my tv all the tracking the tv does oh yeah is short is short-circuited because Everything on the network is subjected to it.
And I'm, you know, as long as these ad networks are serving up malicious ads, I don't feel bad about blocking them.
That's another angle, of course, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, if we go to Talk Python, you know, the website, there's, the ads are still there.
Why?
Because I'm not using some shady network to deliver it.
I'm just sharing content, someone who happens to talk about what we're doing, you know? And so I think that that's a,
I think that's certainly something worth considering, right? I feel like this DNS stuff is part of self-hosting, at least the personal level a bit. It's the fund, it's one of the
fundamentals. Yeah. Networking is one of those things that you have to have it if you want to do anything in your house like even and i use my mother who i love dearly as the as the example of
the non-technical person in my life um even if my my mom like she she orders a router from her isp or something like that to get wi-fi in her house well she's she's doing networking she doesn't
realize it she's getting a wi-fi uh ssid broadcast she's getting an ip address from the router every time she connects the dhcp server provides a dns server which is probably your isps dns server by
default and they are recording all of your dns queries and selling them to the highest bidder also i might add and so there there are just so many layers to this onion and dns is the just what
we have a five-year-old in the house we just watched shrek this weekend hence the onion reference uh there are just so many layers to this onion that you just you can keep peeling it forever and this is one of the things i genuinely love most about Linux open source self-hosting that whole
universe is that this conversation i could literally sit here for eight hours and talk to you about different you know different things like dns is one thing document management is another
media streaming is another like each of these things they're all their entire industries in their own right in the real world but in self-hosting you can play this admin you can play
you know the person who's running these mega corps offline fully just in your basement you know and and there's no there's no business model to feed it's literally just open source software
the true spirit of it running in your house under your control yeah we're definitely in danger of
going for eight hours so i hope not we could right we definitely could and by way of i think that's a perfect transition to talk about this place called awesome self-hosted here which is a git repository
and a website you know i do alex i think this is going to be a bit of a fad it's not really catching on there's only 288 000 GitHub stars in this and if you look at anything you're familiar
with the awesome lists of course there are there are dozens of these things uh but awesome self-hosted i mean it's updated daily like i look at the recent git commits and it was last updated
yesterday yeah um and there are how many categories there must be i don't know but let me scroll like
there's a there's a couple of pages of just categories of things like e-commerce dns for example analytics right you want to replace jira it's in here you want to replace i don't know
you're a wiki it's in here you know it's uh it's honestly kind of overwhelming and so this speaks a little bit to one of my overall philosophies when it comes to self-hosting of
find a problem in your life and solve it like a real problem don't just contrive one just for the sake of it photos is always the universal example i go to because everybody takes photos and so you
want to look at something like image i-m-m-i-c-h and that is a self-hosted google photos clone and it lives entirely on your hardware that you control it has machine learning so it can learn
your face it can do you know object detection it can do basically anything that google photos can do except it lives on your hardware using your files and your compute until the end of time and that
that's an end of it like that's as deep as the rabbit hole goes i love it but it also makes me nervous good it should because the thing with self-hosting is
you get to play sysadmin but it also means you own the data which means when there's an outage
or a hardware failure you're on the hook for that too yeah i'm not super concerned about an outage for my self-hosting thing but i'm i am certainly concerned about an outage of a self-hosted
something for my my production apps and when i said it makes me nervous there yeah yeah there's but the things that make me nervous are twofold.
The first thing that made me nervous would be just backup, backup and restore, or kind of losing access to it.
Like something that I think it takes a while, at least for me, it took a while to learn the lessons through some paper cuts was, oh, there's a new version of this thing that I'm self-hosting, how cool, let's see what it is.
Docker compose pull, Docker compose up, and then it won't start because there's some incompatible migration or something that I didn't run.
And I gotta go read the docs and it says, oh, did you upgrade from version 1.6 to 1.8?
You can't do that.
You gotta go to 1.7 and then 1.8 or to my, and like now I'm an admin, but more concerned, like I had all this data.
What if I can't get it to work on 1.8, but it's like a half database transition and then neither will run.
And now what do I do?
- Well, the best answer to that are some of the primitives around things like ZFS and snapshots.
So there is this concept with ZFS, by the way, if you're not familiar, is the Zettabyte file system.
And it was born out of Sun Microsystems in the early 2000s, I believe.
It's now unfortunately owned by Oracle.
But there is a project called OpenZFS, which is dedicated to bringing it to the masses, to normal people.
There are still some weirdnesses around the licensing with ZFS.
So it's not included by default in every single Linux distro.
But it is included in things like Proxmox and Ubuntu, and you can install it on Arch and NixOS, and even Unraid, I think, has ZFS these days.
And so the idea here is you're using what's called a copy-on-write file system.
Now, some of these terms, I will admit, sound a little nerdy, and they kind of are, but the idea behind copy-on-write is you take a snapshot at a moment in time,
and instead of the file system recording everything, you know, transactionally forever, it will only record the delta from the previous snapshot.
And so what that means is that you can fork, you can basically fork file systems on disk and then you can mount the snapshot from three days ago as an actual file system and then restore the files that way.
So let's say your upgrade scenario.
You could restore the database from just before you did the upgrade because as a good sysadmin, you are doing the hygiene of taking a snapshot before you do the risky thing, right?
You can automate all this stuff with scripts, right?
And I think there's a pragmatic angle here of how much time do you spend automating versus administering versus just going outside and touching grass.
but in the age of AI, there's really not.
I installed Arch Linux last night downstairs on my gaming rig.
I decided I'm done with Windows for gaming.
And I thought, right, how far can Codex get me, you know, the OpenAI version of Claude Code?
And I installed Arch myself, and then I said, right, I want this desktop to look like this.
I want this kind of vibe.
I want an Ubuntu kind of orange vibe.
I want Wayland compositor for my display, and I want it to all log in seamlessly, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
I want these fonts.
I want my fan curves to be this.
And I just let it cook.
And maybe half an hour later, I came back and my system was just configured.
Wow.
And it's amazing.
And you can do the same thing with a lot of backup scripts.
You can literally say to Codex, these are my requirements.
I want you to take a snapshot before you do any kind of Docker compose operation.
And it will do it, whether it's via an alias or whatever.
I don't, the mechanics don't matter.
But the point is a lot of this stuff you can protect yourself from yourself now with so much less cognitive load than you used to have.
You can then configure it to back up offsite to all sorts of different places.
There's a wonderful service called ZFS.rent, which if you're not familiar, is a way of, you basically send them a hard drive and they will put it into a server somewhere.
And you pay, I think it's $10 a month for that hard drive slot.
And then you can replicate all of your photos encrypted over the internet to ZFS.rent.
And it's 10 bucks a month.
And then you've got that peace of mind.
That's wild.
I had no idea about this.
This is a really interesting way.
It's a great service.
I have several friends that use it.
okay yeah that's really cool because backup is certainly one of them and that that's not just export the data that's like making sure the app runs so that you can actually get to the data
that's in the you know postgres db that's running in the little docker composed network that it created when you ran it and so on right there's plenty of other options with backups too like
backblaze is a a decent one although they were in the news fairly recently for some i don't know they stopped backing up one drive folders and just did it silently and um i don't
know you know how reddit likes to go go go in on people so i don't know back backblaze they've been there for a long time they're a pretty reliable option uh you could also if you want to do it
fully self-hosted hetzner you know vps provider they have what's called a storage box which you can usually bid on which i think they cost somewhere typically between 30 to 50 euros a
month so it's not the cheapest option but if you want that level that amount of storage off-site it gets expensive that's just the reality of it um when you when the business model is just storage
and not farming your data and mining you for advertising stuff it turns out storage is expensive yeah that's what you got to pay for it if you're not the product yeah but these things have enough
storage that between you and a few mates you could probably split it up into different zfs data sets and replicate that way and split the bill a little bit, as it were.
Yeah, incredible.
Other self-hosting things that really stand out for you that you're a big fan of?
The real problem aspect is one for me I think that's critical to it, to the success.
I talked about photos as being one example.
Home automation is another.
As you said, you'd had the home assistant guys on this podcast before.
And we actually had Paulus on Self-Hosted a while ago.
And those guys, what they're doing with the Open Home Foundation is amazing.
Again, they're eschewing the status quo of five different apps for five different ecosystems and making everything talk to everything else.
And it's amazing.
And for me in this studio, for example, I've got one, two, three different ecosystems just for my studio lights.
And it's all brought under Home Assistant in one place.
And so for me, that solves a real problem.
So when Home Assistant is down, okay, it's not the biggest deal.
I have to walk around and turn three sets of lights off.
Okay, fine.
But when you start to add all of the different ecosystems in your house together, like your thermostats, you know, I have a mini split up there that I control through an ESP32 with like a serial connection.
I then have an Ecobee thermostat downstairs.
So that's two ecosystems just for the climate in the house.
And then my garage doors are another ecosystem.
And so it continues.
And so solving real problems and bringing them back behind the firewall really is the idea for me.
Just helps me sleep better at night.
But it's also in many cases just more convenient and less hassle.
Yeah.
The unification really that a home assistant brings is really one of the biggest.
because everybody's got their janky little app that they think is so special.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
And I don't blame manufacturers necessarily for going that route because the way the internet was designed is it's, you know, I have something on this desk, right?
How would the manufacturer talk to it to control it through a smartphone app?
The only guarantee you've got is that a cloud server exists.
you can't control whether the user is necessarily on the same Wi-Fi.
And in fact, we've seen over the last 20 years, as technology's evolved, that I remember unboxing products 20 years ago, that just the usability was just horrid.
You know, there are so many assumptions the manufacturers have to make about the environment it's going to land in, the Wi-Fi situation, the smartphone is going to run on, blah, blah, blah.
And the only way you can really guarantee compatibility is to take control of that link.
and host the cloud component yourself and then have your users talk to your cloud and then have the cloud talk to the device.
Even though I can reach out and touch the light that's up here, it has to go to the cloud first to talk to it just because it guarantees that user experience.
Yeah.
I know.
My lights that I have for my streaming setup, they don't even have on.
You can't physically turn them on.
The only way you can turn them on is over the network.
It's weird.
Yeah.
Welcome to 2026.
Exactly.
how do we accept that that is normal when when when did that become normal i don't know they
should i know i think about it never really it should at least have an on button oh well right i know so let's talk for a little while now we've sort of set the stage talked about some awesome
apps and motivation so on but let's let's talk a bit about actually how to do it because i'm sure there's I don't know let me throw out just speculate I bet there's 30 to 40
percent of people like oh yeah I'll just SSH into my setup as well and then I know what to do from there and there's like maybe 20 percent of the people like I know what I know I should SSH in there and the others are like what is SSH
yeah so there's a lot of hesitation I think because you are kind of becoming a a devops person like you're running probably in docker maybe on Linux it's not on your main
machine most likely and then this whole backup sort of story that we talked about it and restore
like talk to people about some of the tech it's inherently still a technical occupation
and there isn't still really a great way around some of that now we're on a python show we understand that abstractions exist, right?
Python, of course, itself is an abstraction above something else.
There are lots of companies that will tell you and will try and sell you abstraction on top of this self-hosting layer.
I'm talking about what Docker is an abstraction.
Linux is technically an abstraction, although let's just not talk machine code.
Let's just treat Linux as the base.
Yeah, I assume you have an OS, okay.
Yeah, I think that's fair.
I agree.
But, you know, there are, I have a couple of, I don't know if you can see it in camera, probably not.
I've got a couple of Zima Board 2s on test, which they sent me for review for YouTube.
And they have something called Zima OS.
Z-I-M-A-O-S.
And, you know, it's pretty good.
Like, it's a one-click.
It's got a little app store in it, like you have on your phone, And you can install a lot of these apps in one click onto Zimmer OS.
You can connect a USB hard drive.
And within maybe 20 minutes, half an hour, you've got a fairly functional setup.
Now, is it the most buttoned up, most secure bulletproof thing in the world?
No, almost certainly not.
Yeah.
But it gets you started.
And I think that is the real key is the best way to learn this stuff is to not think about it too much.
It's just to do it in a fairly low stakes way.
Don't try and switch from Spotify, for example, and convert your wife and your kids and everyone in your life to your self-hosted music streaming service overnight.
Softly, softly, slowly, slowly, catchy monkey.
It's one of those things that you're probably going to need these things running in parallel for a little while until you feel comfortable enough that when you wake up at 7am and the streaming service that you've built in your basement doesn't work
and the kid can't watch their episode of cartoons before school or whatever, do you want to have to log in at 7am via SSH to your server and fix it?
No, I never do.
It turns out that's not something I want to do, but it's something I've had to do a few times because I've made mistakes either in not rotating logs properly or a disk filled up or there was a hardware failure or the list goes on and it's just you know you're
trading some convenience for ownership and the transaction is different and the some of the cost there is in you and your time but i will always advocate for people to learn these skills because
i think in the modern world they are such basic fundamental skills i wouldn't put them quite in the same bracket as learning how to do plumbing or electrical work or something like that but
this stuff you know everybody takes photos everybody listens to music and why should we
continue to enrich the pockets of megacorps when we have the tools and the capabilities to do this
stuff ourselves if we're just willing to put a few weekends aside and learn it it's a great point
I guess start small.
These little...
Start small.
These home or these self-hosting OSs, I guess they sort of call it.
It tries to bring kind of an app store experience to the self-hosting.
Another one that I would say is Coolify.
I don't know if you're familiar with Coolify.
Coolify is great.
Yeah, I'm sure.
Yeah, cool.
I did some stuff with Coolify for a while.
You don't even need anything in your house with Coolify.
They will do hosted versions of these self-hosted apps, if that even makes sense.
But essentially, you're still running the service.
You're paying to run the service on their infrastructure.
And so all of the stuff we talked about around digital sovereignty and privacy and business models all remains true, except for the fact that compute doesn't live behind your firewall.
It lives somewhere else.
Yeah, and you can even do things with CoolFi, such as get a server at Hetzner or DigitalOcean, create an account at Coolify, and then basically install their daemon thing on your app.
And then through there, a little management, you're managing multiple servers running.
I wanted to love Coolify, and I think the idea is great.
I found that I ended up juggling so much more UI settings where I'm like, you know if I just had a Docker Compose file
could just define and replace or something yeah such as the life of an abstraction right you trade certain complexities for certain decisions that the main i mean look at apple right we're we're
always looking at mac os going i wish it why why are they doing it that way well you outsource that decision and the same is true with coolify and any other abstraction that you choose as part of this
stack like even docker for example is an abstraction as i said and you are making a certain set of out you're outsourcing a certain set of decisions to docker and how things work
it's just a reality of the world yeah that's a really good point that's you know you choose your abstraction though i bring it up because i do feel like people who are hesitant to do this kind of stuff this is a really good option to get you started and get you comfortable and like ah
what if i could just run it myself after you were comfortable you know you you work your way down you gain some of these skills. What about Linux? One of the things that I think is both
a hesitation for doing this at all, but also a hesitation to use Docker. It's like, well, I could just do it on Linux. At first, you're like, well, I can't do Linux or Linux is intimidating to me. Eventually, you get that skill. You're like, well, I could just put it on my machine.
why do i need to actually use all this docker complexity
it is the repeatability for me at least so what docker brings to the table is a unified interface
to running headless applications i can define using a docker compose file which is just a a short yaml file in maybe 15 lines i can say right this is the name this container is going to get
These are the exact directories this application is allowed to access on my system.
My Photos app, for example, doesn't need access to my music library.
And so you reduce the blast radius of anything going wrong.
These are the ports it's allowed to access.
These are the kernel capabilities it's allowed to have if you want to get that deep.
You can turn off, from a security perspective, the Photos app, for example, probably doesn't need a huge amount of kernel permissions to operate effectively.
So turn off the stuff it doesn't need.
And then that way, if there is a supply chain attack or a vulnerability exposed, the application itself becomes so much less of an attack vector because it literally physically has no access to certain bits of the kernel.
When you keep going down the list of what Docker Compose can provide for you, within 15 lines, you can define an entire application's deployment and then store it in GitHub completely securely, safely.
Obviously, don't put secrets in GitHub, people.
Please do not do that.
But there are plenty of ways to sort of store secrets locally.
I think there's something called OpenBow, which is a local fork of HashiCorp Vault as a secret management.
You can use Bitwarden CLI.
You can use 1Password.
There's many ways to store secrets.
Again, for me, it's like, why do we need things like Docker to exist?
It's because it's a universal language.
I can ship you a Docker Compose YAML, or any developer system can ship a Compose file alongside their applications, and I don't need to know anything about you or your application.
I just run Docker Compose pull up, and suddenly all of it's like in the Kubernetes world, it's like an operator.
In the Windows world, it's like an installer.
You're capturing all of the knowledge that you have about how to run your application successfully into this artifact, which I then just pull down and deploy and run.
And it removes all of that complexity.
Yeah.
Beyond Docker, you mentioned a lot of the Docker Compose stuff.
You're right.
I'm going to define the networking.
What things can talk to what?
I'm going to define the storage.
I'm going to define the visibility over the firewall sort of levels of things.
And just, it's great.
I just looked on my server.
I have three different versions of Postgres running from different apps that are like, oh, no, we use Postgres 16.
Oh, we use 18, whatever it is.
It's like, how are you going to manage that if you install more than just a handful of things?
Like, they all want these different servers.
And like, you know, what a hassle, right?
But because it's all contained within their own little network that they see, it's fine to run through because they all use the same port, but they're not conflicting.
Yeah, that version of Postgres has no idea.
You could spin up 20 different Postgres 16s on the same server because all a container is really just process isolation in memory.
If you want to think of it like that as a mental explanation, all you're doing is taking your RAM and slicing it up into tiny little boxes and then placing that process inside that box.
that process then can't see anything outside of that box unless you give it specific and explicit permissions to do so.
And that's why containers have taken over the world, if you ask me.
I agree.
I always thought that they were another level of complexity until I realized all the stuff you put in the Dockerfile is basically what you would have had to ad hoc type into your Linux machine anyway.
So you've got to know it anyway.
Yeah, you do.
Yeah.
I mean, the Dockerfile is basically just a bash script just with bells on.
You just put run or env or something in front of all the commands.
Let's come back to your comment on codex and AI, because for as intimidating as these things are now, they're way less intimidating if you just have Claude Code or codex
and you say, hey, explain this line to me, or I need this to happen.
Here's the file.
Why is it not happening, or how do I make it happen?
That is an absolutely achievable thing.
well even stuff like um last week my my server was running slowly i didn't know why the cpu wasn't
busy the ram wasn't full i looked at things like disk pressure i looked at all the things i as a 15-year experience sysadmin knew where to look didn't see anything and so then i had codex go
and look at it via ssh like i was running it on my laptop i said right you have permission via ssh go look at this server tell me what's wrong and it turned out there was some spiking on certain
NAND chips on the SSD when it was trying to write to certain sectors of the disk it was causing massive IO weight and I didn't catch that because it didn't make those rights during but codex ran
overnight and whilst I was sleeping it was still doing the checks and still finding finding out what was going on and it turned out that the SSD my boot SSD was on the verge of failing it just hadn't
marked itself as failing in smart yet uh and it presented me this report gave me all the diagnostics it ran and yada yada i would never have caught that no not until it failed um and
then i'd have caught it but now i have time to go out and research the correct ssd to replace it and not pay rush shipping and all of this stuff because the robots uh went out and and basically
did my job for me i mean it's it's it's like on the one hand ai is one of these things of like we're ushering in the very thing that's going to replace us as as uh humanity but i don't see it
that way like burying your head in the sand and saying you know vibe coded slop this that and the other like it's not it's not really a mature take on it in my opinion yes there's a lot of there's a lot of slop out there yes there's a lot of like but we shouldn't be replacing art with ai
Like art fundamentally is a human endeavor.
And the reason it is valuable is because of the human effort that went into it.
You'll never replace that with a robot.
And not even including the fact that everything that an AI does by its very nature is derivative of something that's actually being done before.
So you're never getting anything truly new and truly revolutionary.
When it comes to like boring menial tasks, like figuring out why my server's slow.
How about it?
I don't want to.
Yeah.
I don't really want to be debugging that all night.
The recent thing I did with DevOps, Docker, and AI was I wanted to do a new self-hosting app, and I want to serve it out of the same server, some other ones, but I don't want them to interact with each other.
I don't even want them on the same network, but the Nginx front end has to be able to get to both of them.
So I'm like, all right, Claude Code.
How do I create a second network that still the one container can see both of the networks, but this one can't see?
You know what I mean?
I'm like, how do I actually make that happen without breaking anything?
It just knows.
Yeah, it's like, this is what you do.
This is the commands you run to create the external network.
And then here's the settings and all the compose files.
You restart them in this order so stuff doesn't break.
I'm like, wow, OK.
If you know just enough to be dangerous on a topic and you can guide it through the hallucinations that it does uh it makes you incredibly powerful and so for that reason at least for the foreseeable
future i don't think it's going to replace you know everybody uh there there are for sure certain
tasks and certain things that humans will be less required for and i think you know we're on the
cusp of either the greatest change in humanity's labor since the industrial revolution or and the economics will bear this out one way or the other you know forces at play here much bigger
than either of us or it will just turn out to be inordinately too expensive to do that for a very long time and then the progress and investment will stop and either a lot of very smart people
are betting an awful lot of money and they're all wrong or there is actually something to this and we will see, I guess.
Yeah, I think it's being misused for a lot of stuff.
But I also think that there's areas where it's incredibly helpful.
And this computer stuff in general, programming, DevOps, amazing.
So we're getting short on time, Alex.
I feel like we've only scratched the surface, like for real, but let's talk about Tailscale.
I want to talk, I want to take one step back before we jump into Tailscale a warning. This is something that really blew my mind when I saw it. So when we're running our
self-hosted apps, obviously we want to have security, limited access potentially. You might be running them at home, so how do you access them? There might be a bunch of funky networking
things that people do, but just as a quick PSA, I want to point out that, come here other window, If you're using something like uncomplicated firewall,
in your Docker Compose file, you say, listen on 00, just default, like this port maps to that port, that's effectively 0000, that port, like listen on all the things.
And you're using something like uncomplicated firewall or one of these other things that manipulates the IP tables.
Docker says, you know, Docker and UFW use firewall rules in ways that make them incompatible, that is like things like UFW don't block access to your Docker stuff.
So something else, something stronger like a cloud firewall or things like that, right?
Like on my servers, I have a, at the cloud hosting level, don't let anything access stuff, but 80 and 443 or whatever, and, you know, limited access to SSH.
But if I didn't have that and I just used UFW, that would be not ideal.
So let's talk about firewalls for a minute.
I think there's a couple of things at play.
One is you're hosting a public-facing service like a website.
That clearly has to be on the public internet.
There's no way around that.
The whole purpose of a website or an API probably is to be hit remotely and provide a response.
But when we're talking about self-hosted infrastructure, the only customer is you, maybe your family, maybe a few friends.
And so the idea behind Tailscale is to bring that connectivity back to be a more personal level.
Our free tier, for example, at Tailscale has a six-user limit.
It has unlimited devices.
And so the idea there is that you and your family all live in the same tail net.
You make sure that Tailscale is installed on your server in your basement or wherever it happens to be.
And it's installed on your phone.
It creates a wire guard tunnel underneath, encrypted end-to-end.
And Tailscale makes a direct connection between those two devices with no middleman.
And so the way that Tailscale remains free is because we give it away for free for a lot of it.
but then we asked those people to champion us at work and we just crossed 30 000 paying customers just last week i believe and so each of those paying customers well not all of them but a large
number came through that that funnel of well this is awesome why are we not using this at work
yeah so let me just sort of give the elevator pitch for people i think how cool this is one way to self-host is I've got this running on a spare computer of whatever sort mac mini
small nuc whatever on your home network you want access to it while it's traveling the not great way is just well let's just put that on the internet I'm going to open up a port on my router
I mean just think back to the last pass thing right how did last pass get this huge takeover a few years ago the one of the devs was running a plex server on the open internet and didn't patch
it that got taken over they had they got lateral movement inside the network gotten the access keys to last pass and down it goes right so that's a bad example of self-hosting better would be
use something like tailscale never open any ports at all but when you're on the tailscale network you see into the networks where it's running you see into your home network even when you're away
or you see into your server infrastructure even though zero ports are open and that to me is just
kind of magical yeah there's a if you want to learn more about it i won't get into the specifics here but there is a blog post called how tailscale works uh at tailscale.com i'll send michael a
a link to put in the show notes uh and essentially the magic there is we abused like stateful firewalls and how they work a little bit to do something called nat traversal so the idea is that there weren't enough ipv4 addresses for every device in the world to get its own address
and sit on the public internet and so we created this abstraction called network address translation each device sits behind a firewall and gets a local ip address you've probably seen the 192
168.whatever numbers that's a local ip address versus what you you get like what's my ip.com or whatever and that'll give you a totally different ip address than what your laptop has with inside
the wi-fi and so you've got to have something that's doing that translation between those two things and that's called nat then tailscale punches through that nat and makes a direct connection from your phone at the coffee shop over 5g through your residential firewall with no ports
open to your server running under the stairs.
It's super seamless.
Yeah, it's super seamless.
So I use it for things like I have a local LLM running on my Mac.
And then if I'm at the coffee shop, then I just make sure I'm on the tail scale network and I can still run apps that talk to my OpenAI API over my self-hosted LLM as if it was running on my laptop,
but it's not.
Yeah.
Remember what we said at the beginning of the show?
The rabbit hole goes deep.
And if you can think of a proprietary service, there's almost certainly a self-hosted alternative to it.
AI is another one that you can self-host.
So if you have a Mac Mini, we all heard about OpenClaw a few weeks ago, right?
You can put it on your gaming rig.
If you have an NVIDIA GPU in your gaming rig, you can use that for local AI.
I mean, the rabbit hole is...
if you're a curious person, I apologize in advance if you've not looked into self-hosting because it will consume you for a little bit, which is just how it goes.
It is definitely how it goes.
And it's very satisfying as you start to make progress in it.
Alex, I think that's it for our time.
Final thoughts for people who want to get started.
How would they get started?
Oh, how would they get...
Oh, gosh, that's a broad question.
Hmm.
Well, if you want to learn more about building a server in and of itself, I run a website at perfectmediaserver.com where you can learn how to build basically a Linux server with some storage in it to replace Netflix or something.
I mean, I don't know.
Awesome self-hosting is a good place to get started.
There are dozens of YouTube guides.
Just type self-hosting in and just watch a couple of hours worth of YouTube and you'll get a pretty good idea.
And then from there, like I say, it's all about figuring out what problems you're trying to solve and then what shape that problem takes versus what your budget is, what your personal risk tolerances are and all that kind of stuff too.
There's a lot that goes into it.
But if you want to reach out to me, alex.ktz.me, you can come find me.
I'm on Discord all over the place.
Come say hi.
I'd love to chat.
Yeah, awesome.
I'll certainly link to your connections on the website.
on the show notes. And I do want to give a shout out to tail scale. I think people should certainly consider it as part of the connectivity of all this stuff, because it makes it so much simpler,
so much safer, not a sponsored episode. Hashtag not sponsored. Yeah. I'm just a corporate shill for free today. For me, I found out about it a couple of years ago and I'm like, this solves all
the problems. And I was just such a fan. And so I just want to make, you know, I think it's really a way that things get quite simplified for it so it was the same for me and i enjoyed it so much and
i've been trying to solve this remote access problem as a self-host for i didn't know it but for 20 years like i opened firewall ports to do remote desktop from school to my house when i was a teenager you know like i've tried to be trying to been trying to solve this problem for a very
long time and i installed tailscale one weekend three years ago and was like holy cow this is
amazing and I got a job here because I liked it so much so beautiful well I really appreciated you coming on the show learned a lot thanks fun yeah thanks for having me yeah see you later